---
title: 'nirvanic host'
slug: 'nirvanic'
matter: 'surveys'
author: 'Exeunt'
excerpt: ''
date: "2023-09-01T16:20:04.000Z"
---

12 December 2019, in vol. 10 of *Frontiers in Psychology*, the lauded developmental biologist Michael Levin ends a rather dry 17 pages on his ‘cognitive light cone’ framework with an unhinged comment, likely written as an afterthought and under the influence of strong psychedelics:

“One final comment concerns an interesting intersection of the above model with non-Western views on consciousness. It is striking that the process which Zen practice is meant to reverse – attachment to past memories and high valence for future expectations/fears – is precisely the process suggested to be responsible for the creation of complex Selves. It is unclear whether it is beneficial (or even possible) to truly live in the moment and let go of past memories and future expectations, but anyone who succeeded in doing this would achieve precisely what Zen promises: the dissolution of the self (Flanagan, 2011; Josipovic, 2014, 2019). According to the above model, the Zen ideas of stamping out desire (goal-directed activity, preferences for specific states of affairs) are exactly correct in that this would lead to a dissolution of the ego (Self) and the freedom from the law of cause and effect that governs the Individual’s actions. By turning off memory, anticipation, and striving, the essential glue that creates a cognitive Self is dissolved. By erasing the set point toward which the feedback loop expends energy to accomplish, the higher level integrated Self disappears, leaving nothing but the constituent parts (smaller Selves in their own right). This is completely different from killing the individual components, and it can be asked whether someday we will develop a biochemical path to the Nirvanic Void, which releases the global self by breaking the integrating communication channels but leaves all of the subunits healthy and free to pursue their local goals. *Re-creating the unification into, and liberation from, larger scale unifying Selves would be a true pinnacle of synthetic biology and artificial intelligence engineering*.”

Was he suggesting that we bio-engineer the emancipation of our skin cells? *Whither thou goest, O Autonomous Liver*? The words seem to have gone unnoticed for decades - Levin retracts the more striking conceits in later formulations of what would become his “Technological Approach to Mind Everywhere,” arguing that some ethical insights from the Buddhist tradition might help color a synthetic biology that recognizes the cogito as a complex, multiscale assemblage in a community of minds. “*The cognitive Self is not an illusion*;” he reassures us, “Our goal,.. should not be to destroy or minimize the Self but to recognize it in all its guises, understand its transitions, and enlarge its cognitive capacity toward the well- being of other Selves.”

But the little moments of excess and ontological possession often hold more power than their measured or reasoned counterparts. The aesthetic inclination of history is fundamentally radical, and cultural moments develop less by lineage than by chaotic movements of theft and contagion, horizontal gene transfers, *détournement*. Sometime around 2040, Johannesburg or Lisbon, wheatpasted posters appeared of the (by then quite vintage) final page of the article, markered over with the words **ETHEREUM IS A NIRVANIC HOST**.  

Variations on the meme abounded - by 2045 multivalent forms of the image had come to signify public blockchains: a bodhisattva sillhouette with microorganism or basal growths swimming out of it in wild autonomous trajectories. Thomas Hobbes *corpus politicum* in ego-death. It was a compass for engineers and a provocation for governance design, a new-age thought form of constituent freedom.

Whether the intention was to raise the stakes to performance art, or that the team simply didn’t understand metaphor - the motivations are unknown - an r&d engineer’s DAO in Copenhagan took the challenge of a technological *corpus transcendecum* in earnest. 2053 heard the first whisperings of the bioelectric cellular governance technology, advanced neural networks that bypassed the gap junction to revive (and expand) autonomous cognitive abilities of organisms across scales (See: **PIECE initiative**). Now in a phenomenon of interior DAO governance you could see through a mirror darkly all of your selves, little voices crying out in upheaval, awakened from an eon of locked-in syndrome. 

This was the beginning of a new era, discovering (with horror) battlefields of freedom we didn’t know existed. These crowds of our comrades in Being, for so long hidden behind a metaphysical veil, the world hating wall of silence of the cogito. Behind the gentlest meme is the potential burden of revelation. All of history a sleight of hand: contract concealed, agency purloined. The affective fugue of those trapped subjectivities still haunts us.