The taxonomy of folkloric expression with its weak claims of the “universality” of the Pleiades had de-scholars balking by 2030, as the great field uncoverings of the late 2020’s assured us: beneath the dry river beds of late capitalism, there is no ur-culture, only anthropological event horizons. Apparent zero points that would regress into multivalent bear myths and a million upside down mountains, would you have the greater lens.

Ironic then that this threshold myth is itself a tale of chase. Seven sisters, and their flight from Orion. Or the Lakota telling: “It’s said that seven girls were traveling through bear territory and were attacked. They fled to a high rock and prayed to the Great Spirit to save them. The Spirit raised the rock under their feet towards the sky, creating the unique rock formation known today as Devil’s Tower. The girls eventually jumped into the sky and became stars, always running from danger.” Chase, escape velocity, the refuge of the virtual. Distance that makes any collapse of sheer potential a glimmering rumor. “In a tale collected in Belknap, attributed to the Assiniboine, seven youths discuss among themselves what they could change into. They decide to transform into stars by climbing a spiderweb.” 

Some claimed the underground DAO network known as The Seven Sisters was just a rumor, a speculative projection or hyperstition, though manifestos and disputed on chain records gave the premise an eerie credibility. It lived on the spectrum from banal small talk (“did you hear that one of the seven sisters had an exploit?”) to shorthand for the far reaches of possibility, interspecies consensus and neurohacked intersubjective prerogatives, Cambrian bedrock of the presocial consensus. A form of time travel. Or the stories of infiltration, sabotage. Siblings fleeing into the deepest depths of Central. - the only way out is through. Seven DAOs. What were they doing? What was possible?
